---
title: "Megacorporations in Cyberpunk Texts as an Angle to Examine Capitalism "
description: "A Comparative Study of Ready Player One and The Red String Club"
pubDate: "Dec 09 2021"
heroImage: "/blog/red-string-club.webp"
---

##	Introduction
Cyberpunk refers to a dystopia genre that reflects high tech and low life. Ready Player One depicts the decaying world in 2045 with long-term economic stagnation and environmental troubles in which a great portion of people binge the virtual world of OASIS. Megacorporation Innovative Online Industries (IOI) led by Nolan Sorrento attempts to find the Easter Egg and take control of the whole OASIS system. The setting of The Red String Club lies in a similar futuristic cyberpunk world, where Supercontinent Ltd. conspires to release Social Psyche Welfare (SPW) that potentially threatens individual free will.  Both cyberpunk texts incorporate the presence of megacorporations by which an evil initiative is plotted or conducted, and it is by corporations that authors expose the corrupt aspects of capitalism as the cause of high tech and low life. Yet, people are not silently bearing such circumstances but rebel either inside or outside of the system. High Five in Ready Player One and PROXYMA in The Red String Club explicitly shows the collective resistance to capitalism, while it is also noticeable that behaviors such as the change of Joanna in The Red String Club further exhibit resistance to capitalism on personal level. 

By focusing on the characters’ experiences with megacorporations and their rebellions against such organizations, I argue that cyberpunk texts call people who are unaware of contemporary political economy to notice, interpret and potentially contribute to changing the political system where we are born. In part one, I synthesize the features of capitalism by examining megacorporations that appear in Ready Player One and The Red String Club, via close reading and game design study, respectively. I conclude that capitalism, as described in these texts, is displayed via features of standardization, alienation, complex machine, power expansion, and exploitation. In part two, I delve into people’s resistance to the above features and how they contribute to changing the political economy in both texts. This part classifies the resistance into three categories: individual rebellions from outside, individual rebellions from inside, and collective rebellions from outside. Finally, I connect the conclusions from the first two parts with real-world incidences at large and conclude that cyberpunk texts reflect contemporary megacorporations and call people to react against the pessimistic post-capitalism future.

To begin with, two cyberpunk texts utilize different narrations to shape the picture of capitalism. As a piece of first-person narrative printed text, the story of Ready Player One is completely delivered in the voice of the protagonist Wade Watts. The image of megacorporation and cyberpunk world in Ready Player One presented to the audience is essentially “filtered” through Wade’s perspective. Wade Watts is a shy and awkward teenage gamer, or hunter, living in the poor “slack” surrounding Oklahoma City with his aunt and uncle, and the poor real-life causes Wade to be obsessed with the virtual world. He needs the elixir - OASIS - to get rid of real-life pain and detests IOI which stymies his access to the treasure. Above all, Wade Watts stands for the lower-class teenagers who are disappointed with real-life and have a strong will to change his life by winning the competition. 

On the contrary, The Red String Club narrates the story objectively in a third-person perspective throughout different gameplay styles, by which the audience can interact with Supercontinent employees and operate facilities in Supercontinent to probe the SPW. In the game, there are three parties: the Red String Club, Supercontinent, and androids and I mainly focus on the first two groups for they represent the rebels and the megacorporation each. Players can collect and piece information together to comprehend the image of megacorpoations, by controlling Akara-184 to make implants, Donovan to serve drinks, and Brandeis to terminate the SPW. Compared with Ready Player One, The Red String Club, firstly, invites the audience to develop, rather than read, the plot, and secondly, provides more diverse narrator viewpoints. 

##	Capitalism Features in Cyberpunk 
###	Standardization

Capitalism transforms unique individuals into dull standardized employees, which is manifested by the name and appearance in Ready Player One. “Sixers” is a derogatory nickname that gunters give to IOI employees, whose only task is to find the Egg for the corporation.  They are called Sixers because their names are “all six digits in length, and they also began with the numeral “6” (Cline 33). When contrasting sixers’ names like “IOI-655321” and “IOI-643187” with “Parzival” and “Art3mis” on the scoreboard, the text explicitly exhibits that standardization deprives the uniqueness of individuals by tagging them with a boring string of digits (Cline 160). All Sixers, regardless of gender, take on an identical hulking male avatar “that is in close-cropped dark hair and facial features left at the system default settings” within the OASIS because IOI has no intention to spend money on avatar which contributes nothing to revenue (Cline 34). 

Akara, the humanoid in The Red String Club, resembles Sixers in Ready Player One for they are both standardized by the megacorporations. Besides named by a number string and having identical appearances, Akara’s work is also standardized. The Red String Club incorporates an implant fabrication game via which players can control Akara-184 to conduct the tedious fleshy mold manufacture and implantation work. Under the supervision of an electronic overseer, players repeat the procedure of reading demand, making molds, and implanting to clients. This game design sheds light on the standardized assembly line work and the monotony accompanied by it. Similarly, Sixers are working in “a vast sea of high-walled cubicles each containing a single person strapped into a high-end immersion rig” (Cline 137). When juxtaposing Sixers with Akara, it is ironic to find out that human employees are standardized by megacorporation in the same way as enslaved androids. In other words, capitalism standardizes employees as robots to maximize the utilization of labor in pursuit of efficiency and profit.
###	Alienation

Capitalism separates work from labors. That means, employees no longer work for themselves but devote their time and effort for the benefit of megacorporation. In Ready Player One, Sixers are contract-bound employees that will transfer the possession of Halliday’s Egg if they find it, in return for alluring economic benefits like paychecks, food, lodging, retirement, etc. Sixers participating in Halliday’s Easter Egg Hunt is neither for fun nor for the grand prize. They conduct the activity to make a living. Megacorporation grabs the fruit of their work, and Sixers unconsciously contribute to “hand the OASIS over to an evil multinational conglomerate intent on ruining it.” (Cline 34). The IOI contract stipulating in Ready Player One exposes how megacorporation utilizes economic benefits to exploit employees working for its benefits.

As narrating in the perspective of Wade Watts, Ready Player One merely provides the readers with a general impression of Sixers. The Red String Club contains an interactive bartending game that players can control Donovan to converse with various Supercontinent staffs, by which players how specific employees think about and react to alienation. There are three interaction modes in the psychological bartending game section: conversation, bartending, and Akara’s quiz. Players can give drinks that evoke certain feelings and ask questions to probe SPW, get to know employees’ minds and potentially change their thoughts. 

Consultant engineer Diana Meyers is firmly proud of SPW initially, but players can guide her to doubt her work by asking “Won’t SPW make you stop being you?” and “Don't you think it's all a bit unnatural? This isn't progress, this is devolution”, which challenges her previous understanding of the project. She is used to following procedures to finish the assigned engineering work and doesn’t think too much about the meaning of work. However, when SPW turns out to be potentially evil, Diana begins to rethink her purpose of work that is in essence a grand vision that Supercontinent depicts rather than her self-realization. After players serve Diana a glass of fear, she eventually expresses her fear of Supercontinent and comments that Supercontinent will achieve their goals “AT ANY COST”. Unlike Diana, corporate lawyer Naima Cosse has never thought SPW a good thing, yet she is still loyal to the corporation and always prioritizes the benefit of the company at the top. According to Akara’s quiz, players know that she is capable of covering the murder of her employer and will never betray the company. Supercontinent completely alienates work from Naima and transforms her into a cold heart android that meticulously finishes every task corporation assigns to her even if she doesn’t agree on. In The Red String Club, Diana is deceived by the company’s spectacular vision and proudly works for the company’s interest, while Naima executes the company’s tasks loyally without any doubt.  Whatever type of employees she is, Supercontinent successfully trains individuals to contribute to the company, rather than for themselves. Labor in capitalism is no longer a means to achieve self-realization but is alienated from human beings and turns into a meaningless process to gain benefit for corporations.

###	Complex Machine

Megacorporations are intricate machines. The Red String Club exhibits the complexity through Brandeis invasion to Supercontinent headquarters. The invasion happens in the office of Johanna, the COO of Supercontinent, where the whole neon city can be overlooked.  Players need to control Brandeis to find out how to shut down Social Psyche Welfare by calling different numbers and impersonating people they have met during the story. Many documents are highly confidential that only a certain managerial person has the access to. For instance, aiming to run “failsafety.nfo”, players need to counterfeit CEO Radhika's signature and have the CTO Francis' access to SRAID. To acquire these two necessities, players further need to collect medical ID information from various Supercontinent managers and employees via HR Karen. Information asymmetry and barriers between different departments and in leader-member relations make the invasion section the most tedious and complicated part of the game. The Red String Club utilizes telephone, computer, and the office surroundings as the media to connect departments in Supercontinent and present the invisible internal organizational structure to the audience.

###	Power Expansion

In an attempt to gain more profit, corporations tend to expand their business to other fields, in which they gradually seize power outside of their original scopes. In Ready Player One, IOI was initially a startup internet service provider and grew up by acquiring hundreds of telecommunications companies, making itself into “a communications conglomerate and the largest internet service provider” (Cline 33). If IOI in the real world is still a telecommunication corporation, the IOI in OASIS has acquired power far beyond the business scope. The newly established “Oology” department further reveals the IOI’s ambition of taking control of the OASIS platform. Well-equipped Sixers spread all over the OASIS and form a large collaboration IOI network in the Egg hunting game. The IOI modified immersion rigs enable “control to be instantly transferred to the team member with the skills best suited to deal with the situation depending on the obstacles an avatar encounters during their quest” (Cline 138). This cheat activity largely undermines the game equity yet gunters can make nothing to combat it. When Nolan Sorrento invites Wade Watts to visit IOI headquarters, Wade sees that “from pole to pole, IOI-1 was covered with armories, bunkers, warehouses, and vehicle hangars. … airfields dotting the surface, where rows of gleaming gunships, spacecraft, and mechanized battle tanks stood waiting for action.” (Cline 137). IOI in OASIS has become an indeed monopoly megacorporation that acquires military power and disrupts the game ecology without any cost. With sound finance and strong technology basis, IOI buys advanced equipment for its Sixer army to boost the speed of finding the Egg.  So does Gregarious Simulation Systems (GSS), which originally releases OASIS for entertainment, but the virtual platform later becomes a mirror world that is substituting and corrupting reality. Supercontinent in The Red String Club also transcends the scope of fleshy implants and intends to eliminate human negative emotions without consent. In general, with the support of its abundant financial and technological resources, megacorporations are inclined to and do seize power in politics, citizen life, and even human rights to achieve their goals.

###	Exploitation

Capitalism spares no effort to squeeze commercial value from people. Aside from IOI, GSS, the company that produces and operates OASIS, is another major megacorporation that appears in Ready Player One. Wade Watts, however, shows entirely different attitudes towards IOI and GSS respectively. The protagonist undoubtedly disdains IOI. In his perspective, IOI “attempted several hostile takeovers of Gregarious Simulation Systems” and “try to seize control of GSS by exploiting a loophole in Halliday’s will” to scale up their business (Cline 33). Verbs like “seize” and “exploit” and phrases like “hostile takeover” hint at IOI’s forceful and avaricious business expansion aiming at monopolizing the whole OASIS market. Wade explicitly expresses his concerns and fear of the world that IOI takes control of and continues to imagine the dystopia afterward. “They would start charging a monthly fee for access to the simulation. They would plaster advertisements on every visible surface. User anonymity and free speech would become things of the past. The moment IOI took it over, the OASIS would cease to be the open-source virtual utopia I’d grown up in. It would become a corporate-run dystopia, an overpriced theme park for wealthy elitists.” (Cline 33). The enumeration of possible dark outcomes such as continuous exploitation of players and the damage to individual freedom showcases the protest of capitalism's excessive exploitation of the public. From the stance of a teenager coming from the slum on the city periphery, it is natural to have the impulse to prevent IOI from turning OASIS into a similar decaying world as the reality.

Conversely, Wade highly appreciates GSS and OASIS because it is a refuge for their generation who were born in an ugly world. To them,” it was much more than a game or an entertainment platform. It had been an integral part of our lives for as far back as we could remember." (Cline 34). Wade further explains his disgust with IOI as he says simulation being privatized and homogenized by IOI is "like someone threatening to take away the sun or charge a fee to look up at the sky." (Cline 34) However, GSS is not a benevolent charity. It is actually another megacorporation eagerly makes a profit from people in the same way as IOI in nature. Wades says, "I purchased my ammo in bulk, but it still wasn’t cheap. And my monthly teleportation expenses were often astronomical. My search for the egg required constant travel, and GSS kept raising their teleportation fares." (Cline 206). The protagonist adds a filter when commenting on GSS and doesn't show much resentment to cost for avatar, yet the company is squeezing commercial value from him. Despite the fact that GSS fought for users’ identity private and offered the public free access to OASIS now, it is still not guaranteed GSS would not be the next IOI after James Halliday dies and Ogden Morrow leaves. 

Even if IOI and GSS receive contrasting appraise from Wade, they are megacorporations that naturally seek to make a profit from people. The only difference is that one explicitly immiserates Wade's life while the other has already become part of his life. As Morrow wrote in his autobiography that “OASIS had become a self-imposed prison for humanity, a pleasant place for the world to hide from its problems while human civilization slowly collapses, primarily due to neglect.” (Cline 120). When capitalism has become part of people’s life, it silently exploits every person in the system and destroying the world without any detection.

##	Resistance to Capitalism in Cyberpunk
###	Collective rebellion from outside
Collective rebellions outside of megacorporations are incorporated throughout the plots of both Ready Player One and The Red String Club. The avaricious exploitation and power expansion naturally incur resistance from the society. In Ready Player One, High Five successfully takes over the ownership of OASIS and prevents the misery future that IOI rules the world. However, The Red String Club offers a bad ending to the collective rebellion: mission fails, and Brandeis falls from the Supercontinent skyscraper. At the end of the game, when Donovan, Brandeis’s lover, takes the amnesia pill, the game window is forced to quit, and all records are deleted at the same time. This design seems to suggest a pessimistic ending of the resistance and asks whether the rebellion is still meaningful. As long as The Red String Club chooses rebellion as the main plot, it has confirmed the meaning of taking actions against capitalism. The failed action, in essence, implies the unexpected strength of the megacorporation, yet it doesn't deny the meaing of the rebellion of Brandeis, Donovan, and PROXYMA. No matter how many times player opens the game, these characters will always probe and smash Supercontinent’s conspiracy. In general, regardless of the different endings they give, both texts convey that the collective resistance is inevitable to capitalism’s exploitation and power expansion.

###	Individual rebellions from outside

Individuals in cyberpunk texts do not passively accept the corrupted capitalist world, but instead, rebel against it via language and actions. In Ready Player One, the overall derogatory tone that Wade narrates IOI showcases his contempt for capitalism. The default hulky male avatar that all Sixers set into, as mentioned in the previous section, is the traditional muscular male image and, together with advanced weapons, implicitly suggests the strength of the megacorporation. Nevertheless, this ruthless, powerful image is deconstructed by Wade and his friends when they tease IOI employees for their standardized 6-digit ID, and they refer to them as “the Sux0rz” (Because they sucked)” (Cline 33). The hilarious nickname “Sux0rz”, more creative than a random number string, stupefies the cold mighty image that IOI establishes and resists the IOI’s sovereignty.

When Nolan Sorrento attempts to hire Wade for Egg hunting and even lure him with the Chief Oologist position, Wade pretends to be interested yet later responds with a series of vulgarities. He was “trying hard to sound nonchalant” and “trying to sound impressed”, and later made three unreasonable requests, including getting Nolan Sorrento’s position (Cline 139). By continuous mocking and fooling Sorrento and IOI, the protagonist conveys the message that “you can’t buy me” (Cline 141). Wade rejects the abundant reward that the megacorporation offers in return for his freedom and, most importantly, the possession of his fruit of work. Upholding the same principle, Brandeis in The Red String Club pursues a “freelance hacker” career and devotes to overturning the unjust system. Even though individuals are trivial compared to seemingly powerful megacorporations, people still insist on working for themselves and combat standardization and alienation by sarcasm and actions. 

###	Individual rebellions from inside

Even inside the megacorporation exists resistance. In the first game of The Red String Club, Akara-184 implants modules that can change thoughts to the Supercontinent managerial people, which results in the betrayal of Johanna Sephtis and Adrian Ferguson. “The punk” implant arouses Adrian Ferguson’s aversion to corporations and rejection to authority, and he will be happy to help you destroy the Supercontinent at the end of the game in his seashore villa. “The hippie” highly enhances Johanna’s empathy and magnifies compassion, which causes her to reflect on her time in the Supercontinent and eventually escape from it. If the player chooses to implant “the grandpa” into Johanna, she will be on the verge of suicide, because Johanna has installed many modules to control emotions before and this module causes a mental breakdown. In the conversation between Joanna and Brandeis on the bridge, we learn that her vision doesn’t align with the twisted objective of the Supercontinent anymore. Not only the employees, megacorporations are alienating managers by exploiting their time and putting pressure on them as well. The natural adverse emotions, although suppressed by the modules, and conscience eventually lead to Johanna and Adrian's rebellion against the disordered power expansion and exploitation of the intricate Supercontinent.

##	Conclusion

Tech giants nowadays are growing more and more like the megacorporations in cyberpunk texts. Meta has set off the new consumer fashion of metaverse, a term first coined in Neal Stephenson’s cyberpunk novel Snowcrash; Amazon improperly pressures its warehouse staff to vote against joining a union; the Epic-Apple case again reveals the monopoly power of this tech giant. Scholar Elana Gomel says, “cyberpunk should be analyzed in a “post-utopia” lens rather than a “dystopia” lens, which indicates that the cyberpunk works don’t present the far future but rather a broad present blended of future and past.” (31). IOI and Supercontinent resonate with people’s technology life experience as the features of cyberpunk megacorporations that we conclude (i.e., standardization, alienation, complex machine, power expansion, and exploitation) are indeed rooted in the reality. “Corporate power use technology in an attempt to reshape the human subject into a more efficient worker and consumer,” but even so we, just like Wade Watts, get used to the system we are born in and do not even think much about the existence of it (Florea 63). As they critique capitalism for its control over human beings, cyberpunk texts “afford an invaluable opportunity to reconsider the relation between base and superstructure” at the same time (Whalen 75). By focusing on the rebellions from society and inside the corporation, cyberpunk encourages people to resist the alienation of capitalism and regain the autonomy of their work. Above all, cyberpunk texts empower people by awakening people’s awareness of self-worth and encouraging them to change the surrounding political and economic systems to circumvent the emergence of post-industrial society and the exhaustion of all hopes for humanity. 


### Bibliography
Cline, Ernest. Ready Player One. Century, 2020

Deconstructeam. The Red String Club. Devolver Digital, 2018

Florea, Marius. “The Cyberpunk Dystopia As a Reflection on Late Capitalism”. Journal for
    Social Media Inquiry, vol. 2, no. 1, July 2020, pp. 63-74, doi:10.18662/jsmi/2.1/6.

Gomel, Elana. “Recycled Dystopias: Cyberpunk and the End of History.” Arts, vol. 7, no. 3 Sep
    2018, pp. 31.
    
Whalen, Terence. “The Future of a Commodity: Notes toward a Critique of Cyberpunk and the
   Information Age (L’Avenir d’une Marchandise: Notes Sur Cyberpunk et l’Ere de
   l’Information).” Science Fiction Studies, vol. 19, no. 1, SF-TH Inc, 1992, pp. 75–88,
   http://www.jstor.org/stable/4240123.